---
title: 'Social Consciousness'
date: 2022-08-27
permalink: /whatnot/2022/social_consciousness/
tags:
  - philosophy
  - course essays
---

## Introduction

In the move from cognition to social cognition, one might also wish to carry over the concept of consciousness to the social level as well. This transfer is inevitably subjected to similar challenges the regular consciousness faces, like the ones put forward by illusionism. In this essay, I will try to develop an evaluation of such a development of social consciousness from the perspective of the illusionist. To do so, I will first try to explore what is or can be meant by social consciousness in Section 2, by following the discourse of moving from cognition to social cognition. To have a solid ground of discussion, the development of social consciousness is developed in length. In the subsequent section, I will give an illusionist account of the developed social consciousness concept, and finish in the last section by summarizing the main line of reasoning.

## Social Consciousness

<!-- %%The first problem of beginning a discussion on the term "social consciousness" would be defining its content. I will attempt to make this definition by following the relation of cognition to social cognition. NEEDS MORE WORK%% -->

Despite a lack of unanimous definition in the literature due to the inclusion or exclusion of various facets of the matter<sup><a id="footnotemark1" href="/whatnot/2022/social_consciousness/#footnotetext1">1</a></sup>, the broadest and most acceptable definition of cognition seems to be all the processes of perceptual information processing, decision making and action planning<sup><a id="footnotemark2" href="/whatnot/2022/social_consciousness/#footnotetext2">2</a></sup>. The shift to "social" is made by restricting the context of this information processing to a specific setting: Social cognition is defined as the information processing of social interactions in a social setting (Frith, 2008). This brings about another level of analysis where each action and piece of information generated by an individual has to be examined as they propagate in the social setting. 
<!-- %%% The classifications of actions (e.g. salutation) come to mean different (inter)actions (e.g. bowing versus hand-shaking) in different social settings.%% -->

What about consciousness? Coming up with an all-encompassing and unanimous definition of consciousness is perhaps even more challenging than it is compared to finding one of cognition, due to the more subjective character of our own experiences and the multi-meaning nature of the word (Van Gulick, 2021) (sentience, wakefulness, what-it's-like, access versus phenomenal consciousness etc.). To comply with the illusionist's contention, I will take "consciousness" or "conscious content" to refer to the phenomenal aspects or the so called qualia of our cognitive and perceptual processes, such as the phenomenal experience of redness due to the visual perception of a red apple. 

The shift to social consciousness, then, seems to require us to consider the phenomenal experience induced in the social setting or due to social interactions. This restriction comes with an immediate consequence. In the case of individual or unrestricted consciousness, we could easily assign phenomenal properties to pure percepts, like the color of an apple, as they were inevitably a part of the cognitive processes involved as the incoming information or data. In the social setting, however, pure percepts fail to acquire a content of social consciousness. The incoming information has to be put into a social context by the subject through social cognitive processes, which means the social phenomenal content of a percept inevitably gets entangled with various forms of social information processing. This prevents us from assigning some social phenomenal content to the pure percept as it is no longer "pure." 

Let's follow the example of red again: The color has acquired many different meanings across time and cultures (Wikipedia contributors, 2022). While it is up to discussion whether the members of these different cultures across time had a common individual phenomenal experience of redness independent of their social context is up to debate, it seems only natural that they assigned different social phenomenal experiences to it. Upon seeing the color, a member of the Western culture may have a qualitative experience entangled with the feelings of courage and self-sacrifice, while one of the Eastern culture may have a qualitative experience entangled with happiness and celebration.

This result leads us to define a very broad class of content for social consciousness, which I will refer to as Context (C) qualia: These are phenomenal properties assigned to any sort of mental content or process that arise when they are put in a specific social context, such as different phenomenal properties the percept of red in the running example<sup><a id="footnotemark3" href="/whatnot/2022/social_consciousness/#footnotetext3">3</a></sup>. The key property of C-qualia is that it always implies the need for a social interaction. We might be tempted to define a sub-class of C-qualia for social interactions, where the only kind of (inevitably much more complex) percepts we are considering are those that arise in social interactions, like hand-shaking. These would necessarily be included in C-qualia, but what about the other way around? The experience of red need not arise in social interactions, of its C-qualia seems to be excluded from this sub-class. By noticing that the requirement of a social context surely implies some sort of prior social interaction, we can easily see the C-qualia of redness to result from a social interaction as well, although not necessarily one that is implemented at the time. 

Another type of content for social consciousness could be one that arises when the subject is aware of their membership to a specific social group, let's call this as Membership (M) qualia. M-qualia is a subset of C-qualia, as C-qualia is the broadest possible social consciousness content possible, but the social information processing that goes on to generate the a sense of membership is much more complex. It necessarily has to make use of personal history and hence memory, for example: My percepts in the US embassy may be exactly the same as those of a US citizen's, but my sense of belonging is largely determined by my personal history (of speaking Turkish, learning the Turkish culture, etc.), as well as the social context presented by the embassy. This sense of belonging is generated by an amalgamation of different social settings and contexts experienced at different times and is not as easily tied to single percepts as we did with the redness: I don't perceive, for example "being Turkish" around. I see Turkish flags and pictures of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and folkloric elements around in different contexts and associate these different social experiences with a unified sense of being Turkish, which supposedly has a qualitative aspect of its own. This qualia of membership (M-qualia) may or may not overflow to the said experiences, but cannot be said to have been generated by any single one of them, and stands on a higher level. 

One final type of possible content for social consciousness is the possibility of shared qualia on the level of groups, that arises from "the unity of social mind" in n Cooley’s words (1907). This speculated type of qualia, let's call it Shared (S) qualia, would be a common commodity of the members of a specific social group at a given time, instantiated in each member upon relevant input. One example could be the Turkish hospitality or a supposedly common way of experiencing the white crescent moon and star on a red background, which are supposedly shared in all Turkish people<sup><a id="footnotemark4" href="/whatnot/2022/social_consciousness/#footnotetext4">4</a></sup>. One might even theorize that the C-qualia presupposes S-qualia and that the members of a social group instantiate each C-qualia of their experiences based on various social groups they are associated with, much like in the example of Western and Eastern reds. However, such similarities in C-qualia can also be drawn without committing to a separate existence of an S-qualia, so its existence is still up to question and is not necessary.

<!-- In summary, I identify the following types of contents for social consciousness: \begin{compactdesc}
    \item[Context (C-) qualia] of any mental content upon being placed in a specific social context,\\ e.g. the redness of a flag at half-mast.
    \item[Membership (M-) qualia] of the sense of belonging to a specific social group,\\ e.g. the "Turkish-ness" of a Turkish person.
    \item[Shared (S-) qualia] that is shared across the members of a social group, \\ e.g. the redness of a flag at half-mast to a Turkish person.
\end{compactdesc} -->

Context (C-) qualia
:   of any mental content upon being placed in a specific social context, e.g. the redness of a flag at half-mast.

Membership (M-) qualia
:   of the sense of belonging to a specific social group, e.g. the "Turkish-ness" of a Turkish person.

Shared (S-) qualia
:   that is shared across the members of a social group, e.g. the redness of a flag at half-mast to a Turkish person.

A key aspect to all kinds of content for social consciousness is that different social contexts imposed on the exact same set of perceptual information can lead to different qualia. Take the visual information of a person in blue and black dominated clothing approaching as you stand in your bedroom, and the subsequent tactile information of the cold metal pressing against your wrists, that of the softness of bed sheets under you, with the proprioceptive information of the muscular movement in opposition to their tension. Keeping the perceptual information the same, the situation can either come to mean that you are being arrested by the police or that you are having fun with your partner depending on the social context. This synthesis of social cognition can be assigned phenomenal properties, a necessarily social one due to its generation process: The fearfulness and anger of having been -- perhaps unjustly, with more context-- arrested, as opposed to the excitement of role play (for some, at least). Such experiences can be assigned phenomenal properties after they are labelled and processed by whatever social cognitive process involved, and these properties would be characterized just like the individual or unrestricted qualitative properties (ineffability, inaccessibility to the third person, supposed incommunicability, etc.).

## Illusionist's Take

What would the illusionist make of such a social consciousness concept? I imagine the first reaction would be to label the social contextual queues (perceived or recalled from memory) as the quasi-phenomenal properties: They cause the percepts and mental events to seem to have social consciousness content. This can serve to dismiss the existence of social phenomenal content developed in the previous section by itself, yet this dismissal would result in a reiteration of the illusionist's defence, as expressed by y Frankish, for example (2016). Yet I find that the illusionist has more to say on the matter on different fronts, and I will try to explore such arguments for each type of content discussed previously.

Let's start with the most shakily defined type, the S-qualia. The defining property of this type of social qualia is its commonality across the members of a social group, so let's take two people who are from the same social group, and attempt to identify what S-qualia they might commonly experience. The question itself already looks self-contradictory, as any such evaluation cannot be justified by any means due to the closure qualia (social or not) to the third person. These two people are simply unable to fully communicate to one another the qualia they experience upon a common perceptual input in any social context. To top this indeterminacy in identity of social qualia, it is not hard to imagine that these two people, as similar as they can get, have different personal and social histories. Because social consciousness must depend on social cognitive information processing as discussed before, these differences would result in divergences in their social qualia of similar perceptual information, opposing the case for an S-qualia they might share. 

The dubious existence of S-qualia can also be argued by starting from a more populated social group as well: Suppose that a social group shares an S-qualia for a social concept. It is very likely that certain subsets of the group differ in their histories and perspectives on the same matter, inevitably differentiating their S-qualia. So, there is not one but multiple S-qualia shared within each subgroup. But the same dissection procedure can be applies to each of these subgroups as well, eventually reaching the individual level, eliminating the possibility that qualia is shared identically by two different individuals.

## Conclusion

## Notes

1. <a id="footnotetext1"></a> See Bayne et al. (2019) for various different takes and discussions on the definition. [Back up.](/whatnot/2022/social_consciousness/#footnotemark1)
2. <a id="footnotetext2"></a> The inclusion of any phenomenal properties/content is deliberately not specified here. [Back up.](/whatnot/2022/social_consciousness/#footnotemark2)
3. <a id="footnotetext3"></a> Whether these qualitative properties are any significantly different than those that arise without the need of a social context, say their full qualia, is a question of significance, but one which I will not answer here as it is not the main point. [Back up.](/whatnot/2022/social_consciousness/#footnotemark3)
4. <a id="footnotetext4"></a> Naively speaking, at least. [Back up.](/whatnot/2022/social_consciousness/#footnotemark4)

## References

Bayne, T., Brainard, D., Byrne, R. W., Chittka, L., Clayton, N., Heyes, C., . . . others (2019). What is cognition? *Current Biology, 29* (13), R608–R615.  

Cooley, C. H. (1907). Social consciousness. *American Journal of Sociology, 12* (5), 675–694. doi: 10.1086/211543 

Frankish, K. (2016). Illusionism as a theory of consciousness. *Journal of Consciousness Studies, 23* (11-12), 11–39. 

Frith, C. D. (2008). Social cognition. *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 363* (1499), 2033–2039. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0005

Van Gulick, R. (2021). Consciousness. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), *The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy* (Winter 2021 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2021/entries/consciousness/.  

Wikipedia contributors. (2022). *Red in culture — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.* Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Red_in_culture&oldid=1078402605 ([On-line; accessed 17-June-2022])